DOC: Add instructor notes (#22)
carpentries-incubator/SDC-BIDS-dMRI: _extras/guide.md

---
layout: page
title: "Instructor Notes"
---
{% include base_path.html %}

relative path root: {{ relative_root_path }}

## Instructor notes

## Lesson motivation and learning objectives

This lesson is designed to introduce learners to the analysis of diffusion

> Magnetic Resonance Imaging (dMRI) data using primarily Python. Although it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (dMRI) data using Python. Although it is
```

Reviewer 2: I think the "primarily Python" is on me. Most of the diffusion episodes are in Python except some of the steps in the preprocessing notebooks which rely on command-line (for eddy / topup) and registration with the T1w image. 

Not sure if there is a way around both of those, but can discuss more on Slack or in a separate issue/PR.

Reviewer: Good call. This suggestion can be ignored then.

> designed for learners who have no prior experience with diffusion MRI, basic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
designed for learners who have no prior experience with diffusion MRI, a basic
```

Author: Done in ad60b89.

understanding of MRI and basic command-line and Python skills are required.

Diffusion MRI is a feature-rich modality. Processing dMRI data involves
numerous aspects, and can take a non-negligible amount of time. Being able
to critically assess the obtained features requires practice, usually with
heterogeneous data.

Upon completion of the lesson, learners should be able to know the purpose and
value of acquiring and analyzing diffusion data, as well as being able to
process and analyze their own diffusion data. This lesson does not cover the
details about the different dMRI data acquisition sequences. Similarly, this

> lesson does not cover quality assurance or check aspects of the processing,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lesson does not cover quality assurance or checking aspects of the processing,
```

Author: Done in ad60b89.

neither does it focus on the importance of visualization for that purpose.

## Lesson design

#### [Introduction to Diffusion]({{ relative_root_path }}/{% link _episodes/01-intro-diffusion-and-dataset.md %})

* If your workshop includes the [Introduction to MRI and BIDS](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/SDC-BIDS-IntroMRI/) lesson,
learners will have the necessary knowledge to better understand how diffusion

> images are generated and different from MRI data. Similarly, they will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
images are generated and different from other MRI data acquisitions. Similarly, they will be
```

Author: Done in ad60b89.

aware of the reasons that prompted the neuroimaging community to agree on a
common storage convention for the data.
* Be sure that learners understand the physical phenomenon diffusion MRI is
sensitive to, and how diffusion is able to capture it.
* Explain that there are other software and tools, such as [`3D Slicer`](https://www.slicer.org/),
[`DSI Studio`](http://dsi-studio.labsolver.org/), [`ExploreDTI`](https://www.exploredti.com/),
[`MRtrix`](https://www.mrtrix.org/), or [`TrackVis`](https://www.mrtrix.org/),
to analyze or visualize diffusion MRI data.

#### [Preprocessing dMRI data]({{ relative_root_path }}/{% link _episodes/02-diffusion-preprocessing.md %})

* Pre-processing in dMRI depends on the available data (acquisition) and the

> quality of the data, so learners should be encouraged to be look at their data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quality of the data, so learners should be encouraged to look at their data
```

Author: Done in ad60b89.

to identify artefacts.
* Similarly, learners should embrace the importance of exploring the output at
each step in order to ensure that the quality of the data has improved after
the pre-processing step.
* Some pre-processing steps in this lesson make use of tools (such as `FSL` or
`ANTs`) that are used as command-line tools, so learners should be encouraged
to check their documentation, and adjust the arguments as necessary.

#### [Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)]({{ relative_root_path }}/{% link _episodes/03-diffusion-tensor-imaging.md %})

* Learners should be able to understand the use, relevance and limitations of
the DTI model, both from the a clinical point of view, and a research setting.
* Be sure to emphasize that even if the DTI model is unable to solve fiber
crossings, the concepts and derived scalar maps are still relevant in
practice.
* Pay special attention to the visualization of the DTI model results in order

> to ensure that the anatomy and the diffusion are correctly registered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to ensure that the anatomical and the diffusion MR images are correctly registered.
```

Author: Done in ad60b89.

of the DTI model in clinical practice).

#### [Tractography]({{ relative_root_path }}/{% link _episodes/04-tractography.md %})

* Make sure to explain the difference between the actual biological white matter
fibers and streamlines in tractograms, and why tractography is not quantitative
in terms of connectivity.
* Emphasize the limitations of tractography in downstream tasks, and the need
to post-process tractograms to reliably account fo the white matter anatomy.
* It may be necessary to let the learners know about the potential
inconsistencies in tractography file formats. These may be due to different
conventions when choosing the origin or center across tools. At times it is
necessary to visualize the tractograms using different software.

#### Concluding remarks

* Try to provide the learners with a clear idea of where diffusion MRI sits
among the rest of MRI or neuroimaging modalities.
* Make sure that all learners are able to follow the lessons and acomodate
the pace to the audience. Diffusion MRI being such a feature-rich imaging
modality, it is important that the explained concepts are clear to the

> learners before passing on to a different aspect. Be prepared to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
learners before continuing to the next aspect. Be prepared to be
```

Author: Done in ad60b89.
